I have about 200 American imprints in 1701.
And of that, maybe 150 or 160 or, you know, discrete items, some complete, some what have you, damaged, some fragmented.
Of that quantity, I have maybe five or six that are printed in New York, one printed in Philadelphia, and the rest printed in Massachusetts.
They just don't exist.
They're established.
And you just frame these things, and then who ascertains that they are unique?
You or the dealers?
The things that I find that are unique?
No, the dealers, sometimes they know, or sometimes they know exactly what they are.
Sometimes they don't extrapolate the importance of what they say.
Do you think they offer them to somebody like Michael Koresson before they offer them to you?
Most of the time, but sometimes they don't.
In this particular case, here's something that sort of slipped through.
I think this is the one.
Let's see.
It's in fair shape, but I'm not mistaken.
This is a copy.
This was the accession from Ayr, which is, I guess, Chicago.
Newberry Library.
Newberry?
Yeah, this is a duplicate.
These are the duplicates of the Massachusetts laws of 1699.
Now, the interesting thing about it, what they did not realize, and I believe this is correct, is that let me see if this is the one.
Yeah, this is it.
When they deaccessioned it, they didn't know that the coats of arms that were used
were for Anne and not for George III or William III.
William III.
So that they did not realize it was a variant.
I didn't realize it until I started looking at it and found out that it wasn't WR.
It was AR.
What is it?
It says AR.
Page 193.
OK.
These were the acts and laws for the session.
Okay, at the general court, it was held May 29, 1700.
And this coat of arms was with the initial for Queen Anne.
And on the right is?
No, Anne Regina, as opposed to William Regis Rex or what have you.
One of these is... Well, do you think there's any kind of difference in the text?
No, the text is all the same.
They just pulled that slug out and put another one in.
But from a collecting point of view, or a collector's point of view, it turns out this is the only known copy of that law with that plate.
And it is known only by inference other than that.
Who came first, this Monarch or the other one?
Oh, the other one.
He died.
There's another thing, talk about American book plates.
There's a wonderful book plate.
Samuel Phillips, his book, 1707.
And he did that when he was at Harvard.
This is a book of Harvard.
Now, I have, it's a nice, but it's not an American book.
I have it only for the book plate.
Now, as a passing, where the hell is it like?
This came out of a library someplace, right?
What?
You know what with the numbers on it?
I would guess a lot of these came out of libraries.
Nothing wrong with that?
No, no, no, no, I'm just saying it's on the line.
Okay, so if you know what, here's something to show you here next time.
This is one of the wonderful things.
There are probably about 25 or so known book plates, American book plates, before 1701.
I mean, that's the universe.
All right?
This is a woman who had her book plate.
And I have this, I have two examples of it.
I think there are maybe four of them known.
That is 1701.
No, it isn't.
It's 1701, but I have another one of hers dated 1692.
So her book plate... Hannah Sutton.
Hannah Sutton had a book plate at least in 1692, because I have one where she dated it.
And I'm certain it's the only woman who ever had a book plate in colonial America.
Where is she from?
Boston.
Did she try to check her out?
I tried to check her out.
Extraordinary.
AAS and the Metropolitan Museum have a copy.
She is supposedly known as the wife of some guy, but the point is that I have two of hers, and I have an unrecorded one from a New Jersey collector.
Book plates before 1700?
Book plates before 1700.
You talk about
And then there is another genre, which I can't show you because, come on, I'll show you some other stuff.
There's another little visual area of collecting, which is books written in Dutch and printed in America.
And in that world, there's a universe of
The interesting thing, Dutch printing, the earliest Dutch printing was 1693.
And the press died out in 1796 and started in 1830.
So in the area of 17th century or early Evans items collected, there's a guy, Henrik Edelman, did a census of it.
And there probably are...
75 known different titles, of which the universe is 88.
And I have one.
Look at this, though.
Let me show you something.
This is all.
That's wonderful.
Look at this, though.
Here's a set of Bibles, right?
I want you to see this.
This was done around 8, 10, 30.
Look at the condition of this book.
There's 48 of these things, all right?
Jesus.
This here is one of the truly amazing things.
This is a set bound in vellum.
You never see vellum in America.
Never.
I was just about to say it's in vellum.
You never see American vellum bindings.
Okay, this is just a nice step.
These are late.
This is spectacular, this book.
That binding.
That's 1790-odd.
I have a few 18th century bindings here.
Those are still engravings, right?
Yeah.
But as far as bindings go, this book here, this is an interesting thing.
Winterbottom.
I think that's wonderful.
That's a nice... Look at that.
That's wonderful.
But here's something that's even more interesting.
I'll show you.
That's the first colored plate in an American book.
What's the name of the book?
Winterbottom's History of America.
Winterbottom is the author.
What's his name?
History of America.
By Winterbottom.
Yeah, it's English, it's a reprint, but that's the first time a hand colored plate was used.
How do you spell Winterbottom?
Winterbottom.
Do you see it?
Oh, there it is.
W-I-N-T-E-I-B-O-T-H-A-M-W period Winterbottom.
Now, the interesting thing is that not too many people know
that in 17, what is it, 1796.
Well, did it take them to get to volume three to get the first color plant?
No, no, no.
It's only one.
I mean, there are a number of illustrations, but that's the only one colored.
Oh, it's home colored.
It has to be game colored.
Yes.
I'm saying that's the first.
I wonder why they did it in volume three.
They only wanted to illustrate the tobacco plant.
I mean, they were all published.
So that's got to be in the tobacco collection in New York, then.
I would hope so.
Yeah.
At Aarons.
This is a set.
in paper.
Again, it's 1820.
Look at this.
It's all the string.
Look at this type of bonding.
This is nice.
Do you like this?
They're elegant.
Here's something.
Morse's American Gazetteer.
G-A-G-E-T-E-R.
I just made a mistake.
No, I didn't.
I didn't make a mistake.
You missing something?
No.
Oh, look at this stuff, man.
Look at this.
One, two, three, four, one.
Oh, God.
That's exquisite.
That is exquisite.
You can't see unless you open it up.
Let me show you some other.
Well, is it the best of what you get, or is it better stuff at the house?
Oh, no, no.
This is all 19th century, and this is the best of what I got for 19th century.
And this is pretty good.
But I haven't gone through this and culled it, and I will cull it, and I will get rid of some things that are a little bit derivative.
I may, I may not.
Do you enjoy the life?
It's the New York mirror.
That happens to have gone through a lot of...
This is beautiful stuff.
This is really wonderful.
The idea of... Here's something that's not American.
You'll never see this again.
Look at that.
These are books.
Imagine what they looked like when they were new.
Not too much difference, just a little brighter.
These are books.
This is blue.
You got those at a notch in it.
No, I got them.
No, this, as a matter of fact, wasn't an author.
Oh, it's a lot, six, eight, each other.
But these were done for the German immigrants to Pennsylvania.
They're song books in German, but only for the American trade.
And one of them has a Philadelphia printed for someone in Philadelphia sort of thing in it.
That's beautiful.
Here's one of the first books that has stamping on it.
Stamping, guilt stamping on cloth.
That's there, right?
1830-ish.
Just take a look.
Hard to tell because 1831.
Yeah, sure.
Here is, you know, that's one type of binding.
And then you get to this sort of, look at these stripes, these colors.
That's gorgeous.
You get these from all over, right?
All over.
You just keep picking them up.
You never know where you're going to get them.
All those horizontal stripes.
What the hell is going on there?
That must have been a fashion, right?
At a given point, it came into being.
It was a fashion.
I love these where they have their names.
A.C.
Livingston.
This is a Brindley one here somewhere.
But Joe Verona.
I'll show you a nice book when I get back.
Here's another vellum book, you know, a little bit different.
That's nice.
But what I'm saying is that someone said to me, did I do crawl announcers, did I check this, did I check the other thing?
And the answer is no.
How many?
I don't know.
18, 19, 20.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
So that's 30 times 7.
That's 210 times 4.
It's about 1,000 books here.
Yeah.
A thousand beautiful books.
Nice books.
Yeah.
Maybe, give or take a hundred.
Yeah, and interesting.
But this is only basically 19th century.
Now, when you get to 18th century... Yeah.
But, I mean, I can show you.
Here, let me show you where... You become a collector.
Why does that become instantly, poof, you're a collector?
It doesn't happen that way.
It is something that evolves in all sorts of complex ways, and there comes a point of maturity in collecting.
What you want to call it, and you said to me earlier,
When did it come upon you that you realized you were madly infatuated... Something like that.
...and totally maniacal about... Whatever you want to put in.
You put it.
The question is, when does your collection... This may be an interesting aspect.
When does your collection expand beyond yourself?
When does it have... Well, when does a collection own you?
not know dick manny says his collection owns him he says he has the most sophisticated security system in the world and even he said quote unquote and even then he will not leave the house without somebody in there that is 180 degrees off from you dick manny that's fine and i'm not asking you to comment on him i'm just giving you something i understand but i'm not talking about the collection owning
He said that.
The collection owns me.
Why does the collection own him?
What does he mean by it?
It's an interesting thing that you want to understand.
What is so important to him that he is possessed by it and by its loss?
Well, he's probably got 20 million or something like that.
I don't believe he has that much money.
Well, I'm just saying throw that out.
But it's money.
It's money.
He did mention X million dollars.
of dollars.
Yes, but I think he has much more X million dollars in furniture and art.
Yeah, but I think he's talking about the whole Shul Amil when he says that too.
You know, he's talking in general about the passion.
Did I lose something or not?
What I'm saying is that Manny as a collector has a major collection.
that is worth a great deal of money.
It's a high spot collection.
Well, it's not a question.
You're talking books and I'm talking about the fact that Manny came into books late in life.
Seven years ago.
He was much more a collector of American furniture and possibly American art.
I don't know.
But his holding of furniture and antiques economically is far greater than his books.
Okay.
What I'm saying to you is that when Manny says he owns his collection.
No, the collection owns him.
The collection owns him.
Manny...
is not a major
whether Manny is a major or not major collector, Manny spends a lot of money on his collections.
He's a major collector of American furniture.
He's not a major collector of books.
He may spend a lot of money on books, but he's not... I think we know that, yeah.
And I'm not going to flail that, but we all understand that.
What I'm saying, however... He's got a lovely collection.
He overpaid on the Shakespeare's.
It doesn't matter.
He's got it.
You know?
That's all.
He didn't overpay.
And there was an underbidder, too.
Exactly.
He's got the Shakespeare.
It's fine.
Okay.
Now, the point I'm getting at, what I was trying to say, you said to me, when did my books overwhelm and captivate me or capture me?
Or, as you put it, own me.
Possess you.
I put it a little differently.
Pull you by the pecker as opposed to whatever.
My feeling is, and the way I would look at it, is when does a collection become important in and of itself